the reason why John Stuart Mill had a
hit book at all the reason why
utilitarianism became a commonly used
concept in debates here on the internet
in the 21st century at all is that it
appeals to a side of our brain that we
seem to exercise every day in the
marketplace in most modern Western
societies most of us all the time are
exercising the part of our brain that
chooses should I do this or should I do
that in terms of whatever I will enjoy
more should I buy this product should I
buy that product and it's very difficult
when you live in that kind of culture
and you live in that kind of a park or
era to take a stand against
utilitarianism and point out the ways in
which no this is fundamentally
ineluctably evil not useful and really
wrong in this video we're actually
taking an even more disturbing step in
explain to you that the kind of
reasoning utilitarianism is based on the
so called pleasure pain calculus is
flawed in yet another important way it's
flawed because very often you're
comparing something real to something
unreal or we could say something
abstract to something even more abstract
something unreal to something else
that's dramatically less real previously
on x-men but there is no question to be
asked there is no salience there is no
relevance of taking this abstract
equation whereby you have an imaginary
amount of pleasure and enjoyment and
then you subtract the amount of
suffering and pain and then ask well how
much is left over what is it a positive
or negative number at the end of the
equation ABS so it's not clear to me why
he's talking about an imaginary amount
of pleasure and pain what would be going
on in that calculation is we figure out
how much good it would take like it
would be caused to to torture the to
commit the active of torture so I don't
know where the imaginary thing is coming
from but let's let's keep going
thousand years later you should be able
to take this stuff apart and put it back
together again like it's nothing homeboy
okay okay okay let's say you meet a
farmer on a field you say wow that's a
big truck you have a lot of apples
loaded in the back of that truck I
wonder I wonder how many apples are in
the back of that truck and he tells you
oh there are twelve thousand two hundred
and eighty three apples loaded into the
back of this truck okay is that a real
number twelve thousand twenty three how
do you know that precise number for the
number of apples he says well we weigh
them we actually we don't even weigh the
apples we weigh the truck we weigh it
before it's loaded with apples then we
weigh it after and then we subtract the
difference and then we take the weight
and we divide it by the average weight
of an apple okay so we know how much on
average an apple way is we know how much
the total weight is the apples and then
I'm giving you this precise number of
exactly how many apples are in the truck
so is that a real number okay all
numbers are abstractions there's a sense
in which you can insist hate numbers are
just created by human culture they
reflect language and civilization and
our subjective psychological set yeah
look there's a difference between
counting the number of apples through
extrapolation based on an average right
there's a difference with that and
actually counting the apples you could
count the apples by paying a human being
to sit there with a chalkboard and tally
how many apples have been loading the
back truck there are also more
technologically sophisticated ways there
were actually a very sophisticated
machines used by oyster farmers because
oysters are worth a lot of money where
they drop the oysters down a chute and
they calculate not just the number but
the precise size weight volume the shape
of the shell you know they fall down a
chute and they're scanned with lasers as
they go so you could take one of those
oysters counting machines you could put
the apples through them you can know
precisely how many apples precisely
their size shape volume weight etc okay
if you wanted to and then you'd say okay
so that's a real number there's a sense
in which that number is more real than
the
other number that's based on
extrapolation and based on belief in an
average right now if you have a farm
where the particular species of tree in
the particular climate all of the apples
very closely conform to that average yet
the the number will may have you know
real predictive power if you have a farm
where you know what there's a huge
variation in apples some of them are
huge some of their saying okay this
stuff is not complex for a philosophy
professor when I say a number is unreal
a unit of measure is unreal we're
dealing with different types of units of
measure right the different types of
reality you should be able to take this
stuff apart and put it back together
again and homey you know I'm doing this
with no script and no preparation and no
I didn't even bother to read John Stuart
Mill from Mississippi all OH
all right if I say to you you know
there's a certain amount of harm done by
cutting off an organ of your body let's
let's keep it real here people let's
talk about male circumcision there's a
certain amount of harm done by cutting
off this part of the body and then the
the boy has to live the rest of his life
it's about 60% of the nerve endings
removed from the end of his penis okay
so that's that's horrible
that's real okay and we could try to
assign a number to it we could try to
measure it but I what's like real and
then the mother of this newborn baby
tells you well you know it may be that
circumcision does harm it may be that
circumcision impairs his ability of feel
sensations through his penis it may have
psychological effects it may cause him
just physical pain and suffering yeah
but you know what she gets a certain
kind of pleasure she gets a certain kind
of satisfaction out of the idea that
she's carrying on a tradition that her
parents and her grandparents
participated in now you are gonna tell
me that in the philosophy of John Stuart
Mill you are gonna tell me that it's
possible to carry out a calculus to
write an equation on a blackboard that
compares the harm of being done to the
pleasure or grad
or enjoyment that we can assign units we
can assign new roles that are equally
real to these two things
the only way they can be equally real is
if they're both equally absurd because
this is part of the tragedy of the human
condition happiness is not real pleasure
is not real enjoyment is not real and
when we talk about harm when we talk
about the harm done by cutting off a
human limb when we talk about the harm
done by torturing a person to death we
are talking about something real if
there were any validity to the
utilitarian approach of creating an
equation a calculus assigning a unit
value to the harm done and unit value of
the benefit why is this not the way we
evaluate for example whether or not to
torture animals to death for the sake of
scientific progress vivisection in a
word right what why can't this is a
highly funded industry with highly
educated intellectual people scientists
doing it why can't they ever come up
with an equation why is it that the
European Union with its teams of highly
paid lawyers couldn't take this
philosophy from John Stuart Mill and
Bentham and put it into practice and
just assign a number assigned a unit
value to how much suffering suffering is
involved with having an eighth kept in
captivity and having experiments done on
it and then how much benefit is going to
be achieved how much pleasure people are
gonna have because now they know more
about you know AIDS or cancer or any
other significant thing they don't even
pretend to draw up these equations
because they know that they're
meaningless they know that they can
justify any evil whatsoever okay any the
most gruesome experiment imaginable on a
monkey can be justified if you simply
name the imaginary pleasure benefit or
outcome that's supposed to result from
this experiment so what do they do what
is the procedure in the European
where there are strict legal you know
definitions but when you can and can't
torture animals to death
you know what's done analysis of
alternatives analysis of comparable
examples where medical professionals
scientists people doing this research
universities they have to present and
they have to be challenged by counter
arguments they have to present what the
other methods might be that could lead
to the same scientific research being
done without harming animals or with
doing dramatically less harm to animals
and this results in innovations right so
if you say you're gonna do experiments
this is a this is a real example but I'm
simplifying it off dub my head if you
say you're gonna do experiments that
involve keeping dogs in captivity and
these dogs basically being miserable so
that you can have mosquitoes let's say
the mosquitoes are carrying malaria
whatever the disease is but you have
these dogs in a laboratory living their
whole life in a kind of perspex case
with these mosquitoes on them all right
but but you know tormenting these dogs
and tormenting some mosquitoes think
about the benefits in terms of malaria
research think about the progress that
can be made how much pleasure human
being is going to get into this right
it's a complete dead end to present this
kind of utilitarian calculus but you
know what was productive saying wait a
minute why do you need the dog in a cage
why can't you just have a plastic
membrane and then have you know the food
the nectar for the for the mosquitos to
drink underneath why can't you breed the
mosquitoes in a cage without having a
mammal there for them to drink their
blood can't we redesign this experiment
in this way the amount of harm the
amount of suffering being done to
animals has been challenged and has been
reduced but not through the pipe the
pleasure pain calculus not through
utilitarian methods the utilitarian
theorem fundamentally both in the real
world and on the chalkboard does not
work when we talk about killing a cow
having a cow live under a steel sky in a
shed on a concrete floor
in a fenced-in area that's tiny for its
whole life just so one day I can have
its throat slit we talked about the harm
done to this cow we're talking about
something real and we talked about the
enjoyment of the meat we are talking
about something much less real or I
might go so far as to say something
unreal why can't be quantified can't be
falsified not verifiable not you know
not generalizable not Universal right
for example one person enjoys eating the
meat and another person doesn't there's
this kind of subjective variation
behavior but dude when you get into what
people find pleasant what they fight a
joy about
when you get into the real depths of
this it gets dark quick no no no no
there's no way I would enjoy some of the
things my fellow human beings would
enjoy these pleasures were people
consider pleasure were people consider
enjoyable this is not something that's
quantifiable verifiable countable
there's no unit to measure this in the
way that we can count how many apples
are loaded into the back of a truck
there's a difference between saying
something is unknown and that something
is fundamentally unknowable there's an
anecdote about a Hollywood actor who had
a scene in a movie and the script called
for him to say alcoholism is an
incurable disease and he changed the
line to make the scene more interesting
and he instead said alcoholism is not an
incurable disease but it is a disease
for which there is no known a cure so
there's no cure that's known yes what an
interesting suggestion that in some
hypothetical future there would be a
cure fellows have known I am NOT saying
to you that the quantification of
pleasure the assigning of a unit value
to happiness is a scientific problem
we have yet to solve it's not that it's
a riddle
that will one day be unraveled it's
fundamentally flawed in such a way that
you can never assign a unit to happiness
you can never quantify human pleasure
and the nature of harm being contrasted
to it yeah you know we can talk about
hypothetical examples where people are
talking about their hurt feelings or
their hurt pride where we start to get
to equal levels of absurdity or
equal levels of abstraction where it
can't be quantified on either side it
can't be given a unit value but when
you're actually comparing torture murder
death rate you know torture to
interrogate someone to produce in
military intelligence of something real
real situation with this that are really
really in the real world the 21st
century questions that are being asked
and where governments have to come up
with answers questions with torture
animals to death for scientific research
these are real-world examples um my
point is fundamentally you will never be
able to quantify pleasure and have a
real number in contrast to the very real
nature of suffering harm and pain now
[Music]
when I look at my own father as an
example he was a man who enjoyed things
I could never possibly enjoy the things
that made him happy in life I would find
ro Berbatov and disgusting and even evil
I'm just gonna give you give you one
example here he owned a small business a
small number of employees and he had a
common email service for the company so
they had a work email address and
unbeknownst to his employees he enjoyed
he delighted every day in reading their
private emails he would even go to the
office early so you try to read their
private emails before they received them
and he would delete emails before the
recipient had seen them and then he
would delight in coming back a few days
later to see the two people angry at
each other because they never replied
the email so you know someone might send
an email saying okay I'm gonna be at
this event on Thursday so I assume I'm
gonna see you there because you're going
to this other thing nearby something
like this he would delete the email
and then he'd get to laugh he'd get to
smile he'd get to be happy when a few
days later he would read the email of
one person being furious the others say
hey why weren't you there I was there I
went to this event on Thursday I thought
you were gonna be there for this reason
you never replied to me but I assumed
you were coming people are disappointed
and people are upset each other and my
father my father was happy
my father enjoyed this hey you can pick
any set of examples you want whether
from the world of Orthodox religious
people what they enjoy is very different
from what I can show it in my life
whether from the world of people who
were into BDSM or people who are into
drug addiction
my father pretty psychologically
disturbing case study but you he was
perceived as normal he was perceived as
someone who had no mental problems at
all and no addictions alright as subtle
as the difference maybe between being
homosexual and heterosexual what they
find pleasurable is significantly
different as subtle difference maybe
between someone who enjoys the feeling
of drunkenness and someone who does not
enjoy it someone who rebels against it
and feels feels not just doesn't think
intellectually but feels this is a waste
of my time I'm being poisoned this is a
intoxicating me this is toxic this is
something bad and evil and wrong and I
can't focus my mind to do the kind of
work I really value because I'm drinking
this outlaw someone who feels that way
is different in some sense from someone
from the highest pleasure the main thing
they enjoy in life is drinking alcohol
okay the list goes on and on
what is pleasant to you may not be
pleasant to me it may reveal how
profoundly alien we are from one another
but if I cut off your arm I am doing
harm in a very real sense and the harm
done to you by cutting off your arm is
the same as if vice versa that harm was
done to me
the nature of the harm were contrasting
in this pleasure pain calculus right
that is more real than the nature of the
pleasure and the happiness that you're
putting on the other side of the balance
the pleasure pain calculus is evil in
think as it justifies any evil
imaginable and one of the fundamental
logical flaws built into it is this
notion of quantification this notion of
assigning numbers of making an equation
in which you're comparing something real
to something unreal I mean really people
like to disrespect my truth but the fact
is that you know my name is I don't know